Ab/java docs workflow definition (#905)
temporalio/documentation: docs/java/how-to-develop-a-workflow-definition-in-java.md

---
id: how-to-develop-a-workflow-definition-in-java
title: How to develop a Workflow Definition in Java
sidebar_label: Workflow Definition
description: In the Temporal Java SDK programming model, a Workflow is a class which implements a Workflow interface.
---

> 
> import RelatedReadList from '../components/RelatedReadList.js'
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
Nix this.

---
id: how-to-develop-a-workflow-definition-in-java
title: How to develop a Workflow Definition in Java
sidebar_label: Workflow Definition

> description: In the Temporal Java SDK programming model, a Workflow is a class which implements a Workflow Interface.

Reviewer 2: Per https://developers.google.com/style/pronouns?hl=en#relative-pronouns, changed "which" to "that".

I'm fairly certain that we don't claim the term "Workflow Interface," so we should be safe lowercasing "interface." Someone please correct me if I'm wrong.

```suggestion
description: In the Temporal Java SDK programming model, a Workflow is a class that implements a Workflow interface.
```

Author: Changed this and updated it in a few other places also.

---

import RelatedReadList from '../components/RelatedReadList.js'

In the Temporal Java SDK programming model, a Workflow is a class which implements a Workflow Interface:

```java
public class FileProcessingWorkflowImpl implements FileProcessingWorkflow {
  // ...
}
```

## Workflow Interface

The Workflow Interface is a Java interface and is annotated with `@WorkflowInterface`. Workflow interface methods must have one of the following annotations:

- **@WorkflowMethod** denotes the starting point of Workflow Execution. Workflow Execution completes when this methods returns.

> - **@SignalMethod** indicates that this method is a Signal handler method and that it can react to external Signals. It can have parameters which can contain the Signal payload. It does not return a value, so it must have a `void` return type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **@SignalMethod** indicates that this method is a Signal handler method and that it can react to external Signals.
  It can have parameters that can contain the Signal payload.
  It does not return a value, so it must have a `void` return type.
```

> - **@QueryMethod** indicates that this method can be used to Query the Workflow's state at any time during its execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **@QueryMethod** indicates that this method can be used to query the Workflow's state at any time during its execution.
```

>   It can have parameters which can be used to filter a subset of the Workflow's state that it returns. Since it does return a value it must have a non `void` return type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  It can have parameters that can be used to filter a subset of the Workflow's state that it returns.
  Because it does return a value, it must have a non-`void` return type.
```

> Workflow interfaces can define only a single method annotated with `@WorkflowMethod`. They can define

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A workflow interface can define only a single method annotated with `@WorkflowMethod`.
```

> any number of methods annotated with `@SignalMethod` and `@QueryMethod`, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it can define any number of methods annotated with `@SignalMethod` or `@QueryMethod`, as in the following example:
```

```java
@WorkflowInterface
public interface FileProcessingWorkflow {

    @WorkflowMethod
    String processFile(Arguments args);

    @QueryMethod(name="history")
    List<String> getHistory();

    @QueryMethod
    String getStatus();

    @SignalMethod
    void retryNow();

    @SignalMethod
    void abandon();
}
```

> The `@WorkflowMethod` annotation has a `name` parameter, for example: `@WorkflowMethod(name = "MyWorkflowType")`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `@WorkflowMethod` annotation has a `name` parameter, such as `@WorkflowMethod(name = "MyWorkflowType")`.
```

> It can be used to denote the Workflow type. If not set, the Workflow type defaults to the short name of the Workflow interface. In the example above, the Workflow type defaults to `FileProcessingWorkflow`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can be used to denote the Workflow Type.
If not set, the Workflow Type defaults to the short name of the Workflow interface.
In the preceding example, the Workflow Type defaults to `FileProcessingWorkflow`.
```

> Methods annotated with `@WorkflowMethod` can have any number of parameters. We recommend passing a single parameter that contains all the input fields. This allows adding fields in a backward compatible manner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A method annotated with `@WorkflowMethod` can have any number of parameters.
We recommend passing a single parameter that contains all the input fields.
This technique allows adding fields in a backward-compatible manner.
```

> The `@QueryMethod` annotation also has a `name` parameter, for example: `@QueryMethod(name = "history")`. It can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `@QueryMethod` annotation also has a `name` parameter, such as `@QueryMethod(name = "history")`.
```

> used to denote the Query name. If not set, the Query name defaults to the name of the method. In the example above, the Query name defaults to `getStatus`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can be used to denote the Query name.
If not set, the Query name defaults to the name of the method.
In the preceding example, the Query name defaults to `getStatus`.
```

> The `@SignalMethod` too has a `name` parameter, for example: `@SignalMethod(name = "mysignal")`. It can be used to denote the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `@SignalMethod` also has a `name` parameter, such as `@SignalMethod(name = "mysignal")`.
```

> Signal type. If not set, the Signal type defaults to the name of the method. In the example above, the Signal type defaults to `retryNow` and `abandon`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can be used to denote the Signal type.
If not set, the Signal type defaults to the name of the method.
In the preceding example, the Signal type defaults to `retryNow` and `abandon`.
```

> ### Workflow Interface Inheritance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Workflow interface inheritance
```

> Workflow interfaces can form inheritance hierarchies. It may be useful for creating components reusable across multiple

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Workflow interfaces can form inheritance hierarchies, which can be useful for creating components reusable across multiple Workflow interfaces.
```

> Workflow interfaces. For example, to implement a UI or CLI button that allows you to call `retryNow` Signal on any Workflow, redesign the above interface example to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, to implement a UI or CLI button that sends a `retryNow` Signal to any Workflow, redesign the preceding interface example as follows:
```

```java
public interface Retryable {
    @SignalMethod
    void retryNow();
}

@WorkflowInterface
public interface FileProcessingWorkflow extends Retryable {

    @WorkflowMethod
    String processFile(Arguments args);

    @QueryMethod(name="history")
    List<String> getHistory();

    @QueryMethod
    String getStatus();

    @SignalMethod
    void abandon();
}
```

> With this, another Workflow interface can extend just `Retryable`, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using this approach, another Workflow interface can extend just `Retryable`:
```

```java
@WorkflowInterface
public interface MediaProcessingWorkflow extends Retryable {

    @WorkflowMethod
    String processBlob(Arguments args);
}
```

> Now if we have two running Workflows, one that implements the `FileProcessingWorkflow` interface and another that implements the

Reviewer: This content maps to "How to send a Signal to a Workflow Execution in Java" I think.

> `MediaProcessingWorkflow` interface, we can send a Signal to both using their common interface and their respective workflowIds, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```java
Retryable r1 = client.newWorkflowStub(Retryable.class, firstWorkflowId);
Retryable r2 = client.newWorkflowStub(Retryable.class, secondWorkflowId);
r1.retryNow();
r2.retryNow();
```

The same technique can be used to send a Query to the Workflows using a base Workflow interface.

Note that this approach does not apply to `@WorkflowMethod` annotations, meaning that when using a base interface, it should
not include any `@WorkflowMethod` methods.

> To illustrate this, lets' say that we define the following **invalid** code:

Reviewer 2: Per https://developers.google.com/style/text-formatting.

```suggestion
To illustrate this, let's say that we define the following _invalid_ code:
```

```java
// INVALID CODE!
public interface BaseWorkflow {
    @WorkflowMethod
    void retryNow();
}

@WorkflowInterface
public interface Workflow1 extends BaseWorkflow {}

@WorkflowInterface
public interface Workflow2 extends BaseWorkflow {}
```

> If we attempt to register implementations of Workflow1 and Workflow2 with a Worker, it will fail. Let's say that we have:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Attempting to register implementations of Workflow1 and Workflow2 with a Worker will fail.
Let's say that we have the following:
```

```java
worker.registerWorkflowImplementationTypes(
        Workflow1Impl.class, Workflow2Impl.class);
```

> This registration will fail with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This registration fails with the following message:
```

```text
java.lang.IllegalStateException: BaseWorkflow workflow type is already registered with the worker
```

## Implementing Workflows

> A Workflow implementation implements a Workflow interface. Each time a new Workflow Execution is started,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Workflow implementation implements a Workflow interface.
```

> a new instance of the Workflow implementation object is created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each time a new Workflow Execution is started, an instance of the Workflow implementation object is created.
```

> Then, one of the methods (depending on which Workflow type has been started) annotated with `@WorkflowMethod` can be invoked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, one of the methods (depending on the Workflow Type of the instance) annotated with `@WorkflowMethod` can be invoked.
```

> As soon as this method returns, the Workflow execution is considered as completed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As soon as this method returns, the Workflow Execution is considered to be completed.
```

> Workflow methods annotated with `@QueryMethod` and `@SignalMethod` can be invoked during a Workflow's execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Workflow methods annotated with `@QueryMethod` and `@SignalMethod` can be invoked during a Workflow Execution.
```

> Note that methods annotated with `@QueryMethod` can be invoked even when a Workflow is in the `Completed`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that methods annotated with `@QueryMethod` can be invoked even when a Workflow is in the `Completed` state.
```

> state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Workflow Implementation Constraints

> Temporal uses the [Event Sourcing pattern](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/patterns/event-sourcing) to recover

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Temporal uses the [Event Sourcing pattern](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/patterns/event-sourcing) to recover the state of a Workflow object, including its threads and local variable values.
```

> the state of a Workflow object including its threads and local variable values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> In essence, every time a Workflow state has to be restored, its code is re-executed from the beginning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In essence, every time a Workflow state is restored, its code is re-executed from the beginning.
```

> Note that during replay, successfully executed Activities are not re-executed as their results are already recorded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that, during replay, successfully executed Activities are not re-executed because their results are already recorded in the Event History of the Workflow Execution.
```

> in the Workflow event history.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> The following constraints apply when writing Workflows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following constraints apply when writing Workflows Definitions:
```

- Do not use constructs that rely on system time.

> - Do not use any mutable global variables in your Workflow implementations. This will assure that multiple Workflow instances are fully isolated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Do not use mutable global variables in your Workflow implementations.
  This constraint assures that multiple Workflow instances are fully isolated.
```

> - Do not call any non-deterministic functions like non-seeded random or `UUID.randomUUID()` directly from the Workflow code. The Temporal SDK provides specific API for calling non-deterministic code in your Workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Do not call non-deterministic functions (such as non-seeded random or `UUID.randomUUID()`) directly from the Workflow code.
  The Temporal SDK provides specific API for calling non-deterministic code in your Workflows.
```

> - Do not use any programming language constructs that rely on system time. For example, only use `Workflow.currentTimeMillis()` to get the current time inside a Workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Do not use programming language constructs that rely on system time.
  For example, use only `Workflow.currentTimeMillis()` to get the current time inside a Workflow.
```

> - Do not use native Java `Thread` or any other multi-threaded classes like `ThreadPoolExecutor`. Use `Async.function` or `Async.procedure`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Do not use native Java `Thread` or any other multi-threaded classes like `ThreadPoolExecutor`.
```

>   provided by the Temporal SDK, to execute code asynchronously.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Use `Async.function` or `Async.procedure`, provided by the Temporal SDK, to execute code asynchronously.
```

- Do not use any synchronization, locks, and other standard Java blocking concurrency-related classes besides those provided

>   by the Workflow class. There is no need for explicit synchronization because multi-threaded code inside a Workflow is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  There is no need for explicit synchronization because multi-threaded code inside a Workflow is executed one thread at a time and under a global lock.
```

>   executed one thread at a time and under a global lock.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

  - Call `Workflow.sleep` instead of `Thread.sleep`.
  - Use `Promise` and `CompletablePromise` instead of `Future` and `CompletableFuture`.
  - Use `WorkflowQueue` instead of `BlockingQueue`.

> - Use `Workflow.getVersion` when making any changes to the Workflow code. Without this, any deployment of updated Workflow code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use `Workflow.getVersion` when making any changes to the Workflow code.
```

>   might break already running Workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Without this, any deployment of updated Workflow code might break Workflows that are currently running.
```
